The future of mankind. Wisdom vs. Knowledge

Why wisdom maybe the only thing that will save our world from self-destruction



 Lest we forget! This is the slogan people in the English speaking world use to pay their respects to tens of millions of people who died in the last century and before. It is a reminder of bravery, valiance, courage and it is a reminder of how crazy our brains are. Our minds are capable of creating space rockets, composing a beautiful symphony and destroying millions of lives because of a personal conflict. 

Why does it have to happen this way? Why are brains work this way? What can we do about it? To answer these questions, we first need to understand how our minds work.

When many people think of our brain, they see a uniform construction inside our skull that does all the thinking. However, this is not true. In the most straightforward representation, our brain looks like an onion. Deep inside we have the first layer - the reptilian brain, which is responsible for your heartbeat, for your sweating, etc. Moving up in the layers we have our emotional brain with the parts like amygdala. Look at it as the drug disposing center. Michio Kaku, a famous scientist author of Physics of Future calls the parts of the brain discussed so far a Cave Man inside of us. If we feel danger, a Caveman's brain produces "it's dangerous" drugs or hormones like adrenaline and cortisol, that makes your heartbeat faster, shuts down all "unnecessary" functions to survive the predator. If we are running and our body feels like it, to survive it needs to you make you feel better, so you push harder - it releases the "second wind drug," aka endorphins. This brain is perfect to work with simple operations, but it is incapable of doing anything complicated.

Now the outer layer of your brain is called the cortex, which I call a 'scientist inside of us.' A part of it called the pre-frontal cortex - is the thing that helps you build complex neuron connections, analyze and structure your memory and self-reflect. If it weren't for these parts of the brain we wouldn't have created cars, wouldn't be able to fly or even start a fire.

Here is the crazy part all of the layers are working together, but want different things from us! It reminds, these cartoonish representations when a person has an angel and a devil characters flying close to his brain and telling the person what to do. For example, when you feel stressed before the exam, your cortex brain may tell you that you need to relax, but your Caveman's brain has already released the "it's dangerous!" drugs that make you feel agitated. So you don't get enough sleep, and you feel tired the next day.

Sometimes parts of your brain can help manipulate each other. For example, when you have heard an insider joke, that requires some logic to decode - your frontal cortex fires up neurons, that understands that it is funny, tells your emotional brain to fire up some "happiness drugs" like dopamine and you feel warm. Other times, you hear a sad story that makes your emotional brain fire up some drugs that make you feel bad, and you want to stop listening to the story. According to famous researcher Kauffmann, our emotional brain can make us feel a certain way about something, for example, bad, which then translates into our scientist to come up with rational arguments why it is bad. In my opinion, this sort of hijacking by our inner Caveman was the reason behind many of the issues of the 20th century.



If it weren't for emotional feelings, which weren't backed up by practice, the German emperor William 2 wouldn't fire Bismark, who masterfully kept the european geopolitics in hand. If it weren't for Austrian government blind emotional disregard to their southern neighbors in Serbia - it wouldn't lead to Gavrila Princip to shoot Franz Ferdinand. Maybe we wouldn't have had the WW1. If it weren't for the blind emotions of the revolutionaries, who refused to see the long-term benefits of the Stolypin reforms, killing children of high officials in Russian Empire, it wouldn't lead to even more violence from the government officials. This wouldn't lead to Revolution and save millions of lives. 

If only European leaders were more astute and could understand the direness of the situation in Germany, where a technologically advanced Germany, lost WWI was humiliated by the defeat, reparations. The Allied countries, blind by the anger after the war created a misfit state with the most talented engineers and scientists of that time. A situation that masterfully used by Hitler. We know how many lives it took in the end.

In all of these cases, the Cavemen inside of us took control of the weapons developed by our "Scientist brain" which led to tragic results. In modern World, situation may be even more dire, with many countries having nuclear weapons it could be the end of the world if we take control of ourselves.

So what do we do you ask? Well, my solution is relatively simple and sophisticated at the same time. We need wisdom. What is wisdom? - Well, unlike knowledge which is the accumulation of knowledge, wisdom is the ability to apply the knowledge and create a framework for making the decisions.  We need to be observant of the situation around us, the thoughts in our heads and where they are originated from, see if the guesses that we make are backed by data. For example, it could be very emotionally pleasing to see Toms helping kids in Africa to have a pair of shoes for free, but if that means that all of the local shoemakers go out of business, we create a state fully depended on the outside. A careful data analysis has to be done to see if our help is making good or harming the communities. In other words, we need to turn on our scientist's brain and let him guide our Cavemen inside of us.

From the personal perspective, a lot of conflicts that I have been to were in the moments of emotional rage, where I couldn't control my thoughts and let the Caveman speak instead. Usually, I would say something and the regret those words for weeks. Of course, I would think, it is easy to analyze in hindsight. But at the moment itself it felt like the time was flying and I couldn't think logically. Ironically, a similar situation I had during the Brazilian Jiu-Jitsu competition, where I felt like the time is flying, I don't have time to think, what should I do, I am panicking. The secret here is to slow down and have a deep breath. That is it! Slowing down will send your brain a signal that everything is under control. You will feel like you took control of the situation. A similar thing could be applied in your personal lives, whenever you have a conflict, a deep breath could make you start thinking logically, will mute the Caveman and let the scientist speak. 



So in summary, our onion-like brain has two persons living inside of it: a scientist and a caveman. If we don't teach our scientist brain to take control of our Caveman, we will struggle in our personal lives. If our politicians couldn't learn that, it could lead to very dangerous conflicts. So, whenever you in a dispute take a deep breath, and you will see what to do next!